---
title: Asynchronous Configuration | Commerce PHP Extensions
description: Learn about the important configuration files that you must configure in your Adobe commerce and Magento Open Source extensions.
contributor_name: comwrap GmbH
contributor_link: https://www.comwrap.com
keywords:
  - Extensions
---

# Asynchronous configuration

When using the message queue, four configuration files in your component must be updated:

*  communication.xml
*  queue_consumer.xml
*  queue_topology.xml
*  queue_publisher.xml

More information can be found in [Configure message queues](configuration.md).

Asynchronous and Bulk APIs are built on top of the usual REST API and use the Message Queue Framework for processing messages. To ease development efforts, the Asynchronous API pre-generates the following configuration files:

*  communication.xml
*  queue_publisher.xml

and provides the `queue_topology.xml` and `queue_consumer.xml` files within the `Magento/WebapiAsync` module.

## communication.xml

Information about the auto-generation of `communication.xml` can be found in [Topics in Asynchronous API](async-topics.md)

## queue_publisher.xml

The `queue_publisher.xml` file is generated by the `\Magento\WebapiAsync\Code\Generator\Config\RemoteServiceReader\Publisher` class, which implements `\Magento\Framework\Config\ReaderInterface` and is injected into the `\Magento\Framework\MessageQueue\Publisher\Config\CompositeReader` constructor argument in the main `di.xml` file.

```xml
<type name="Magento\Framework\MessageQueue\Publisher\Config\CompositeReader">
    <arguments>
        <argument name="readers" xsi:type="array">
            <item name="asyncServiceReader" xsi:type="object" sortOrder="0">Magento\WebapiAsync\Code\Generator\Config\RemoteServiceReader\Publisher</item>
            ...
        </argument>
    </arguments>
</type>
```

The sort order is set to 0 and allows developers to change some aspects of the generated configuration in configuration readers such as `queue_publisher.xml` and `env.php`.

`\Magento\WebapiAsync\Code\Generator\Config\RemoteServiceReader\Publisher::read()` calls `\Magento\AsynchronousOperations\Model\ConfigInterface::getServices()` to get an array of all REST API routes which can be executed asynchronously. Then, it defines the connection name as `amqp` (or `stomp` for ActiveMQ Artemis) and the exchange as `magento` for each generated topic name.

## queue_consumer.xml

The asynchronous/bulk API has one defined consumer which processes all asynchronous/bulk APIs messages.

```xml
<consumer name="async.operations.all" queue="async.operations.all"
              consumerInstance="Magento\AsynchronousOperations\Model\MassConsumer"/>
```

The connection type (AMQP or STOMP) is determined automatically based on your `env.php` configuration.

### queue_topology.xml

The message queue topology configuration links all auto-generated topic names with prefix `async.` to the `magento` exchange and defines the queue named `async.operations.all` as the destination for all messages.

```xml
<exchange name="magento">
    <binding id="async.operations.all" topic="async.#" destination="async.operations.all"/>
</exchange>
```

<InlineAlert variant="info" slots="text"/>

The message queues connection is defined dynamically based on deployment configuration in `env.php`. If AMQP or STOMP is configured in the deployment configuration for the queue, the respective connection is used. Otherwise, the database connection is used. Because the connection is resolved using the configuration, explicit declarations are unnecessary in the [message queue configuration files](./configuration.md): `queue_customer.xml`, `queue_publisher.xml`, `queue_topology.xml`.

<InlineAlert variant="info" slots="text"/>

ActiveMQ Artemis (STOMP) was introduced in Adobe Commerce 2.4.5 and later versions. For STOMP connections, use ANYCAST addressing mode for point-to-point message delivery and load balancing across multiple consumers.
